Um, I'll ask Jonathan later on
because some of those, like what
they shouldn't be. Oh yeah.
Yeah. As long
As they're not looking at, we generally accept one, so.
Alright.
Morning, Ross. Ross. Good morning. Yep. Ross. Yeah.
Right, right. Okay, well, welcome. Um, good to see here.
We've take your submission as, as being really,
but, um, we've, you know, look forward to hearing
what you've got say and, um, we've got you down for,
although you are representing both Su Reno.
Yep. They are two separate entities in this context.
So, um, we've got you down for 10 minutes,
but if we go a little bit over because you are representing
two organizations, then we will say,
but we can't go too far over
because, um, we've got one other submitter
and, um, we've gotta be back finished by before nine, so,
Yep. In your hands.
Okay.
I'll let, I'll let you know actually,
um, I'll put it on this one.
I'll let you know when we've
got about say three minutes to go.
Uh, well, good morning. Uh, my name's Ross Summerville
and I'm the general manager for ISO use
and Reno New Zealand.
Uh, really appreciate the opportunity to come
and do the oral submission with you this morning.
We are highly concerned
with the Clean Vehicle Standard Belt.
We share the motor,
the motor industry association's concerns that the
Current, can you move the microphone
just a little bit closer to you please?
We share the motor industry association's concerns
that the current CVS targets significantly outpace
consumer demand and risk undermining new vehicle
affordability and vehicle choice.
And we recommend
that the Clean Vehicle standard bill is scrapped
for the following reasons.
The CVS will penalize many critical industries
for contributing so much to New Zealand's economy, such as
our farming, building and construction, forestry
and energy sectors.
These industries require vehicles that can operate safely
and effectively in New Zealand's toughest terrain.
This bill will inflate the price of those vehicles
between 2000 and $8,000.
The CVS will create an inflationary cycle.
Not only does it increase the cost of new vehicles
to businesses who may pass those costs
to their customers inflation that also inflates the costs
of those vehicles to those who enjoy their lifestyles
connection to the outdoors sport.
DIY New Zealanders travel distances we
to heavy loads
and have high levels of personal use for tools
of trade vehicles.
These charges represent a new form of tax on businesses
and private consumers
and may impact public confidence whilst they feel p alive
purchasing a new vehicle.
Even now with the Clean Vehicle Standard charges, we feel
that they should appear as a cost line on all new vehicle
invoices for transparency reasons to the consumer.
We also seek transparency on how the fund is being utilized.
As consumer costs increase their potential impacts,
households and businesses may hold onto the
current vehicles for longer.
Newer vehicles have emission reductions
that will reduce the effectiveness of the bill
with less new vehicles purchased.
Automotive dealerships may feel the pressures from
decreased, decreased revenue, which may lead
to increased unemployment across our industry
or business closures.
Um, can I just quickly share a graph? Yeah, sure.
I'll just quickly hand,
This graph actually shows
that there's been a massive shift from 2015 to 2025
of internal combustion engines to hybrid.
So the, the blue is your internal combustion engine
and your, your, your gray is your,
is your hybrid vehicle this import imports or new vehicles?
New vehicles. Vehicles, yeah.
So you can, so this progression, it's not been achieved
by implementing attacks on new car buyers,
but it's been achieved by the availability
of appropriate technology across brands
and models which suit consumers.
New Zealand is a technology adopter
and we rely on our global brand's development
of technology to lower emissions.
The technology to require to ca to cater
for those productive views
or cases that we discussed is not yet available,
nor is it expected to be affordable
under the current CVS bill.
Those hybrid vehicles will now also incur a fee
of $800 to $2,000.
In conclusion, we would urge the committee
to adopt a more pragmatic evidence-based approach
that supports a mission reduction whilst protecting consumer
needs, affordability and industry viability.
The clean vehicle standard is unworkable, unfair,
and should be scrapped.
We appreciate the opportunity to contribute
to this important policy discussion
and we'd welcome any questions.
Thank you, Ross. Um,
I think I had a first question from Kim.
She is, thanks Ross. Uh, we've got a question about the,
uh, difference between the clean vehicle standard of
what we're going to the clean vehicle standard
and the Clean car standard.
And how do you think they will,
how do you think that'll impact on the age of the fleet?
So if tradies and fathers
and people that need heavy vehicles rely on that
and it's making it more expensive,
seems logically gonna stay with older, more, uh,
emitting vehicles do, how do you think the difference
between the two systems, uh, with the minor changes, uh,
will play out until the age of the fleet?
I think any, either, any policy that
that becomes inflationary on the price of a new vehicle
is likely dis to dis encourage people
to purchase new vehicles which do have lower emissions.
Um, any increase in cost to the consumer, which likely mean
that they would hold onto the current higher emitting
vehicles and New Zealand's fleet risks getting older.
Other questions, Julian? Going ahead. No questions.
Um, can I just ask two questions?
The first one is, you said it'll put a fee, I think,
I think you said it'll put a fee of about 800
to $2,000 on a hybrid vehicle.
Yep. Can you just walk us through that?
Because the whole idea is to try
and encourage the, the standards to try
and encourage more, um, uh,
lower emitting vehicles to come in.
So I'm just trying
to understand why there'll be a penalty on
those kind of vehicles.
Yes, it is just basically the targets.
So if you look at the targets
and then there's the weight calculation as well.
So many of those vehicles, some
of them are New Zealand's uh,
consumer's favorite vehicles will have, will incur a fee
of anywhere between $802,000.
So there will be, there will be fees on hybrid vehicles.
Yeah. So that those,
so those will be the fees on those vehicles,
but they, you said you were going sort of eight eight, uh,
2000 to 8,000.
Yep. For other, for vehicles generally.
So what you're saying is there'll be a fee on those ones,
but a higher VE fee on the higher
missing vehicles effectively.
Yeah, so basically if you looked at Utes for instance,
or Ute based SUVs, they would end up,
they would have in cut a fee for around 2000
to $8,000. Right.
Okay. So is I think where you started off with saying
that the, the aspiration, if you like in the
proposed legislation is much is further ahead
of the efficiency of the vehicles are likely to be imported.
Can you sort of expand on that a little bit
For us please? Yeah,
where the targets are, so for us, we,
we believe that the technology's not quite there yet.
The technology's coming and you can see it
and you can see it with, um, some
of the vehicles that's becoming available.
But the target, the targets are set to future technology
that's just not, it's not here, it's not available to us.
So the targets are, targets are just too low.
They don't, they don't match up to what is available for us
to import today.
Okay. That's helpful. Thank you. Can
I just raise the thing about weights is the problem, uh,
that ev that that hybrid, uh, electric vehicles being
captured to do with the extra weight carried by batteries,
why, like you mentioned weight when you were talking
to the chair about, um, how EVs would be captured
with a higher cost
And with hybrids. Yeah, because
Is that because yeah, sorry, with hybrids, is that
because of the weight to
Emissions calculation And the generally
Weight? Yep.
It's weight.
So there's a weight balance with the the fee
that would apply Yeah.
To, to those vehicles in the CO2 calculation.
And then you made a further comment about the targets
versus the, um, technology reality do, so are these targets
set beyond what you know, New Zealand?
What before at the earlier in this conversation, um,
someone said, uh, you know, new vehicles
but clarified ordered vehicles
because basically we don't produce vehicles in New Zealand.
Yeah. So we're a taker
Of technology, technology taker. Yep. So
Are we, do you think that um, that this, this,
if this bill was to pass its current form,
it would have an impact on the manufacturers overseas?
Would they take any account of New Zealand's situation?
If we produce this as a law,
modify the way they manufacture vehicles,
New Zealand's contribution to global new vehicle sales is
that 0.14%.
So, you know, we don't actually have that high enough volume
to be able to push manufacturers in that directions.
That, having said that, I mean,
our brands have made a global commitment to continue
to work on lower emissions.
It's just that they haven't been able
to provide the technology as yet,
but the commitments are there.
Can I just, thanks, thank you so much for your submission.
I'm just wondering if you, um,
like have any more substantive data to demonstrate
what you're saying about there not being the vehicles
available to import that would, um,
that would avoid the charges that, do you have any,
like data I think is, like the submissions that you've
provided are quite brief and, um, this graph,
I I just wanted to ask also a question
of clarification about the graph,
but Yeah, do, are you able to, like, is there any,
'cause a lot of, most other countries have
fuel economy standards and
before we had the clean vehicle standard,
New Zealand was getting less efficient versions
of the same vehicles that were sold in the uk.
So I'm just like, do, is there any, like,
there are, there are extremely efficient
vehicles being produced now.
Yes. And so people can avoid the charges by
purchasing the more efficient vehicle.
Well, currently if, if,
well if they bought purchased a hybrid,
then they won't, they will have a fee.
Yeah. But there are, I mean, can you, so
as vehicle importers, do you have like some like
lists of vehicles to show us that demonstrate that there's,
there's no alternatives?
Uh, yeah, I believe that we could put
something together for you.
Okay. That would be great if you could submit that.
And I just wanted to ask this question about this.
You're saying this improvement, um,
occurred in the absence of anything like a tax.
Do you, you don't think there was anything
that happened in here when this blue line went down
that was related to there was no policy
that put a price on high emitting vehicles
and a rebate from a remitting vehicles? Yeah, in this time
We are, we are aware of exactly what that done. Oh,
Okay. Okay. So
actually there was a tax on high million vehicles
that was extremely influential in this
big change right here?
Well, yes. No, see, when EV was started
to become available and we had the,
we had the clean car fee, or as many called it the Ute tax.
Um, yes, there was, there was many, there was many consumers
who chose to purchase EVs,
and you'll always get early adopters and,
and some user cases ev would set their lifestyle that
rock our industry massively.
Yes, it may have given some brands some confidence
to bring in some EV product,
but the losses that they have, they have received on
that product, trying to move it through now
and find buyers for them is unbelievable.
So whilst EV at the moment is about 5.8%
of the market share, that's actually falsified
because there are still many brands with massive sales on
and losing thousands of dollars on those vehicles
as they try and find buyers for them.
Do you think that's because the clean
co discount was repelled?
I don't think that's the case. No.
I just think that we tried to force consumers down a pathway
that they weren't ready for.
Right. And you can see that with the nat,
the more natural progression of uptake in hybrid vehicles.
Um, but like there's a,
there's a substantial increase in both the EVs
and the hybrids from the point at which the clean
Harvest can't. Yeah. So
what we're now finding is, um, companies
who are looking to lower their own emissions, they were,
they may have been the ones purchasing EVs
and pH EVs, they're now changing the fleets from their,
from them to hybrids.
I just have one other question, which is, um,
Look, just before you do, um, Julie, uh, Julianne, um,
our next minute apparently is not yet on Zoom,
which is why I'm letting this go a little bit further.
Um, I think if they're not there in a couple
of minutes we'll just finish with, um, with Ross, um,
ask the questions you want and then wrap
up. So, but carry on.
Oh yeah, I mean there, there are some examples
of countries like Norway who've, um,
set really ambitious targets for reducing the emissions
of their fleet, um,
and achieved them through policies like standard
and financial incentives.
Definitely, definitely.
Do you think there's something substantially different
between Norway and New Zealand?
Like, do they not have farming?
Do they not have building, do they not, you know,
because Norway seems like a pretty similar country in some
respects, like population.
I, I'm gonna take this answer from now.
Our, our other, uh, guests are online,
so we'll take this answer from, but we'll wrap up.
Well, we're actually here to discuss
how it impacts New Zealand.
Yeah. Not another foreign nation. Okay,
Ross, thank we really appreciate that.
And if there is any more data
you can give us, that would be great.
And also if you've got anything in, in,
'cause that that's passenger
and SUV, the asking you for heavy,
heavy vehicles may be unfair,
but if you do know anything about
that, that'd be interesting too.
Yep. Cool. Thanks Ross. Appreciate it. Thank you Ross.
Appreciate your time. Thank you. Right.
Let's get the imported Motor Vehicle Industry Association
and you're very welcome to stay for
this one as well if you want to.
Morning, Greg.
Morning chair. Uh, morning members.
Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Now, Greg, we've got you for,
I'm gonna say we've got you for about eight minutes, um,
because the, uh, bells will ring
and then, uh, a good number of us gotta get into the, uh,
into the house in the next, uh, three or four minutes.
So I'll let you know when you've got about, uh,
uh, say three minutes to go.
Uh, if you wanna leave time for questions, we appreciate
that and your time is, uh, underway.
Thanks very much, chair.
Um, as, as you know,
via represents the used import supply chain
and we are the, the sector
that is bringing in practical affordable cars, uh,
for the average Kiwi household.
While we support the Bill's direction, um, we continue
to have concerns about the way the clean car standard
or clean vehicle standard, as it's been called, is designed
and we think it's the wrong fit
for the way New Zealand's vehicle import market is designed
with the split between new and used.
The policy mismatch comes from the fact
that we've borrowed policies from overseas
where those countries have, uh, totally different economies.
Uh, they are wealthier,
they focus on new vehicle production and sales.
They have neighboring countries that can take, uh,
their exiting vehicles.
While some changes were made to the policy to, uh, adopt,
uh, uh, to adapt to the fact that, uh,
historically about half of the vehicles imported
to New Zealand have been used in ports.
Um, the adjustments were very crude.
Um, we can see that, uh,
the way the Clean Car Standard is working at the moment
with its credits and,
and penalties, uh, it is, um, more advantageous
for the new car industry.
Although I know the new car industry has their,
their own issues with the, the policy.
Um, in the used sector, well over 70% of vehicles
that are coming in now are facing penalties.
Um, and as your previous, uh, submitter, um, uh, said,
uh, from next year,
because the targets have gone so low,
even hybrids will start to be penalized.
And uh, one of the purposes of the Clean Car standard was
to promote the technologies
that help bring cleaner vehicles to New Zealand.
Um, used imports have fallen 20
to 25% over the last year or so.
Uh, and that was from a, uh,
almost similar fall the year before.
We've gone from averaging volumes of
around 120,000 vehicles a year to expecting somewhere
around 80,000 to 90,000 vehicles, if not fewer.
Uh, what this means is
that we are not turning over the fleet
while we are bringing in vehicles
that are nine to 10 years old.
They are replacing vehicles that can be 20 years old.
Uh, so we are the midlife replacement midlife refresh.
Uh, we, we provide a different service than the new car
industry, the new car industry.
Um, certainly you can look overseas
and say there's all sorts of technologies available, uh,
and that's great if you can afford it.
What we are trying to do is trying to bring in vehicles
that the average Kiwi family can afford.
And, and our research on, uh, trade me data
and, uh, talking to the retailers affordable sits somewhere
between the 15,000 to 20,000 range.
Um, your, uh, your, your newer sort of hybrids,
uh, especially, um, larger, uh,
family sized hybrids are sitting around 45,000.
Um, so, so it's clear that, that those vehicles are out
of the price range of the average Kiwi.
Um, while, while we are talking here about,
uh, about the, the toughness of the targets, uh, and,
and we don't think we're walking back any of the ambition,
I think we're trying to reset some, some realistic targets
and trying to talk about what realistic looks like
and practical looks like.
Um, with respect to the bill that is in front
of the committee, um, as I say, we support the bill.
Um, we actually ask for, for several of, uh,
of these mechanisms that, uh, are being brought in.
They're being brought in anywhere 12
to 18 months later than we would've hoped.
Um, but uh, we do think that, um, uh,
this does make the market better.
Um, the one thing we would call for is that the, um, now
that the minister will have the power
to remove the weight adjustment in the calculation, we ask
that that be done as soon as possible.
Uh, because that weight adjustment, uh, is very much, um,
uh, a, a, a burden for the,
for the used vehicle industry.
Our vehicles are generally smaller.
Uh, and so, uh, smaller vehicles get hit worse, um,
under that weight adjustment.
Um, I think
that's, that's the main thing I had to say was
to support the support what's in the bill.
Um, and uh,
and just mention that, uh, as the previous submitter said,
um, while this bill, uh,
makes some moves towards improving the marketplace, uh, uh,
we do think there are further moves that need to be made.
And we certainly do need to look at the settings
'cause they, they drop very quickly.
Uh, and as I said, the, the policy itself was built
for a new car market.
Uh, and we have a very unique, um, split
between new and used.
Uh, and it, uh, it is not been good for the used car market.
Uh, I'll welcome any questions. Thank
You, Greg. We've got, uh, just
under three minutes to go cam.
Uh, thank you. Thank you Greg.
Um, I've got a, your, your stock that you are sourcing from,
as you've said is sort of nine to 10 years old, so
that's already basically set.
I guess the question would be, um, is the standard,
do do the standards that have been proposed,
do they accurately reflect what is achievable with that?
You know, with the, with the brackets around
what you've got to source from already?
Like is it achievable?
Um, it's only been achievable.
Uh, if you look at the numbers, uh,
you can look at the numbers one way
and say there has been some reduction in CO2, but that is
because we are only really able
to bring in small vehicles like acquis and fits.
Um, and the market is getting saturated with that.
There's only so many of those we can sell.
Um, our, our, the main volume
that we can't bring in anymore are the,
the people movers the sort of five to seven seaters,
um, in a hybrid. Bigger
Families. Hu
Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's,
it's the families
and the lower income families that,
that are gonna face it tougher now
because they're now looking at vehicles
that are already in the fleet, uh, are just gonna get older,
um, hybrid vehicles of with, with the sort of size
of vehicles that, that we could bring in for families.
Um, they started coming into Japan in around 20 17, 20 18.
So they are actually just coming into our pool of, uh,
vehicles that we would, uh, be, be choosing from.
But because they're still quite big, uh, and have, uh,
and have CO2 um, uh, profiles that, that are
beyond the targets, uh, it's too expensive to bring them in.
Right. Thank you. Greg.
Do you have, um, any, uh, information when you sort
of talked about the, the nature of the fleet?
'cause it sort of, that makes it quite stark
because not everybody wants a, um, you know, a a tiny car.
Um, do you have any data on the, the types of cars
that have been bought in and how
that's changed over time in response to this uh,
Solution? I, we, we,
we have looked at that data.
I don't have it in front of me right now. That's okay.
But it'll be useful to get it. We
Should, we should send something
through on, off the top of my head.
Um, for us in the used car market,
our split was generally about 40% smaller vehicles
and 60%, uh, family sized vehicles.
So we're talking your people movers, your AFAs,
phis, those sorts of things.
Um, we are basically not bringing in those family
sized vehicles anymore.
The, the, the focus has been on the smaller vehicles, uh,
because they get the least penalties.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay. That's quite, um,
Carlos, you got about one minute.
Yes. I just want to talk about the import industry
for used car because I, I know that only,
we only can import cars with, uh, use the car
for already have 67 lifespan already,
like being used for six or seven years.
Can you explain to the committee how that market work?
Do we have any enough, um, car available from Japan,
which we can input to the ceiling to match that standard?
There's, there's, well the, not to match the standard,
no the, in the used car space in that nine
to 10-year-old space, as I said, we're, we are just starting
to move into the larger number of, of hybrids that, uh,
that would meet custom demand.
Um, and would be able to come into that sort of 15
to 20,000 um, uh, price range, which was,
which is the affordable price range for the average Kiwi.
Um, it, without, without changing the settings, we,
we can't access those vehicles
because they, they will just be too expensive. Another,
No, we we're gonna have to call it there guys.
Sorry. We are, um, we need to be in the house one minute.
I gre thank you very much.
If you can give us any of that
data, that'd be very much appreciated. Will
Do. Thank you very much. Thank
you.
Thanks team. Thanks.